“All Scripture
is inspired of God.”
Now, let’s stop right there
and unpack that statement,
because there’s a lot to unpack.
Let’s take the last part first,
“inspired of God.”
Now, you know what that means.
It means that God put his thoughts
into the mind of man,
and then men wrote them down.
You know what that means.
But now, when you tell a householder
from house-to-house
that the Bible is inspired by God,
does the householder
necessarily know what you mean?
Not necessarily.
Why not?
Because the word “inspired”
is thrown around rather casually today.
“This motion picture
was inspired by real events.”
God is not in the picture.
A poet or a songwriter
is inspired by a sunset.
And so if the householder
doesn’t have a strong Bible background,
it’s not likely
that he understands what you mean
when you say
that the Bible is inspired by God.
And you’ll have to explain that the Bible
is God’s thoughts about men
and not man’s thoughts about God.
But now we’re going to spend most of our time
on the first part of our text,
“all Scripture.”
And we have to ask,
How did Paul and the other Bible writers
and the early Christians
in the first century—?
How did they determine
which writings were inspired
and which were not?
Now, we’ll examine three Bible texts
that illustrate the problem.
Let’s turn to Luke 1:1.
I’ll give you a moment.
And our goal in reading this text
is to see if there is
a problem with determining
whether a writing is inspired or not.
At Luke 1:1, Luke writes:
“Seeing that many have undertaken
to compile an account of the facts
that are given full credence among us.”
What is Luke saying?
There were many gospels
of Jesus Christ in the first century,
and yet only four of them
were accepted as inspired.
Now, how was that determined?
Did the Christians
put a bunch of manuscripts on the table
and say, “Oh, I like this one;
this one, not so much”?
That wouldn’t be
a very good way to determine
which books were canonical or not.
Now, as a second illustration, or example,
Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians
was not Paul’s
first letter to the Corinthians.
If you’ll turn to 1 Corinthians 5:9,
you’ll see what I mean.
At 1 Corinthians 5:9,
here Paul writes
in his first letter to the Corinthians:
“In my letter I wrote you
to stop keeping company
with sexually immoral people.”
So there was a previous letter
before what we now call
Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians.
I guess if you want to be picky,
you would call this one
Paul’s first inspired letter
to the Corinthians.
But now, that previous letter
was never accepted
as part of the Bible canon.
Why not?
Was it a good letter?
No doubt it was.
Was it accurate in every way?
Maybe.
Maybe not.
It wasn’t inspired.
Now, why do we say maybe not?
Well, Insight
made a very interesting comment
about the writings of Bible writers
when they were not writing under inspiration.
And speaking of these writings,
Insight  says
that they “may have reflected to some degree
“the incomplete understanding
that existed in the early years
of the Christian congregation.”
So if someone was just writing for himself,
writing a letter
to some congregation or some brother—
Maybe the disciple James
was writing to someone early on
before the decision of circumcision was made,
and he said, ‘Well, it’s probably best
for Gentile Christians to be circumcised.’
He might have said something like that.
But then, of course,
when the decision was made
under the influence of holy spirit,
James would have written and spoken
in harmony with holy spirit.
And, of course, his letter
—the letter of James—
was written under inspiration.
So when Bible writers were inspired,
their letters and their writings
were without error.
Now, for one last example,
turn to Colossians 4:16.
And Paul writes:
“And when this letter
“has been read among you,
“arrange for it also to be read
“in the congregation of the Laodiceans
and for you also to read
the one from Laodicea.”
The letter to the Colossians, inspired.
The letter to the Laodiceans, not inspired.
Well, how was the decision made?
Now, the Catholic Church claims
that the so-called fathers of the church
made the decision that they are the ones
who compiled the Bible canon
at the Council of Carthage in 397 C.E.,
but the decision was made much,
much earlier than that.
And we have a clue
when we read Peter’s words
at 2 Peter chapter 3
and verse 16.
We often read this verse for another reason,
but let’s read 2 Peter 3:16
and think about the Bible canon.
And here Peter is talking about Paul,
and he says:
“Speaking about these things
as he does in all his letters.”
Now, Peter here
is writing in the year 64 C.E.
And that means that at least
13 of Paul’s 14 letters
had already been circulated.
So he talked about Paul writing
in all his letters.
“However, some things in them
are hard to understand,
“and these things
the ignorant and unstable are twisting,
as they do also the rest of the Scriptures.”
So here already in the year 64 C.E.,
a decision had been made
that Paul’s letters
were part of the Scriptures.
How?
Well, we haven’t answered the question.
We keep asking the question,
but we haven’t answered it.
The answer is found
at 1 Corinthians chapter 12
and verse 10.
And remember our point in reading this.
We’re looking for the way in which Christians
were able to determine in the first century
which Bible books and letters were inspired
and which were not.
So Paul is talking
about the gifts of the spirit here,
and he says that there was given
“to yet another
“operations of powerful works,
“to another prophesying,
“to another discernment
of inspired expressions.”
Certain Christians in the first century
had a miraculous gift of the spirit
that allowed them to determine, to discern,
which writings were inspired
and which were not,
and that is how the Bible canon
came together.
And when you think of it,
it really makes sense, doesn’t it?
Holy spirit guided the writing of the Bible,
and holy spirit
guided the collection
of the inspired writings together
into what we now know
as “all Scripture.”
“All Scripture is inspired of God.”